---
layout: post
published: true
category : sports
author: Bruno Fernandez-Ruiz
title: Training and Pleurisy
---

Deep chest pain, breathlessness, nausea, weak. These are symptoms that
should make anybody run to A&E. Nonetheless, I did not. At least, not
till having gone first through two sleepless nights. Here's my tale of
how I discovered I had pleurisy.

It all started on Dec/23. I had done a nice 55km indoor ride on the
KICKR, ending up 2nd on the rankings at Cycleops and Strava, putting
in an average of 278w for over 90 minutes. Given that I had just come
out of recovering from a cold, the ride felt good. By the time I went
to sleep, I could feel pain inside my thorax. I thought it could be
some gas, and just went to sleep. In the morning, I woke up feeling
much better and spent the day with the children at the local pool and
then cooking our traditional Christmas Eve dinner. Once the evening
came, the pain in the chest came back, to the point of making me
nausea and almost like passing out.

The chest pain was so deep that it prevented me from breathing deeply.
I was taking short, frequent breaths to avoid the stabbing. My heart
was also not liking it. I was feeling nausea and almost vomitted. I
decided to go to sleep. Only to realize that laying down just made the
pain much worse.

At this point, I started considering all options. The obvious one was
a heart attack, but I ruled out given that I have had an EKG recently
done and the results showed I was in excellent shape. A search on the
web did not give me any confidence. The range of other options was
wide, from being just a pulled muscle, to pulmonary embolism,
collapsed lung, pneumothorax and pleurisy.

After much search on the web, and taking a couple of Ibuprofen pills,
I finally managed to fall asleep for an hour or so, in a sitting
position. The rest of the night was just a nightmare. In the morning,
I was feeling slightly better, so I quickly settled that it was a
pulled muscle. But over the day, the symptoms came back. Not only
that, my blood pulse was high (compared to my normal range), my heart
rate was high, and eventually I was having tachycardia.

![Heart tachycardia]({{ site.base_url }}/assets/tachycardia.png)

Things did not look good.

I went to sleep on the night of Christmas Day with severe chest pain.
After another sleepless night, Reeta finally convinced me to do the
sensible and call NHS 111. As soon as I called, the operator asked me
to go within the hour to A&E. Oh dear, who wants to go to a hospital's
emergency room on Boxing Day. I prepared myself for long queues, and
we headed to the hospital. To our surprise, and despite an announced 1
hour 28 minutes expected waiting time, I got treated almost straight
away (kudos to the staff at the A&E Department in the NHS Princess
Hospital in Pembury, Tunbridge Wells).

Hospitals follow a certain procedure for cases like this one, in order
to walk through the diagnosis process, evaluate symptoms, and rule out
possibility after possibility. It was the first time I was exposed
first hand to differential diagnosis (yes, the kind you watch at House
MD). In my case, the differential went as follows:

* EKG. Rule out heart attack.
* Blood tests. Rule out bacterial infection.
* X-Ray. Rule out collapsed lung.
* More blood tests (hormone). Rule out pulmonary embolism.
* CT scan. Rule out pneumothorax (and others). By the way, somehow the
  contrast did not go into my bloodstream and ended up into my muscle
  tissue. I can guarantee that's painful. Not only that, but the
  amount of attempts the staff had a finding a vein they could put the
  line in was simply not funny at all. I look like a drug junkie now.

So after 10 hours of tests, the resulting diagnosis was pleurisy (aka
pleuritis). Pleurisy is an inflammation of the pleurea, the tissue or
lining that protects the lungs. The inflammation can be bacterial or
viral, and since my tests had not shown any bacterial infection, the
doctor happily called it "viral". This is upsetting since viral is a
catch-all for unknown causes. The good news in any case is that
whatever I had was not a heart condition or pulmonary failure.

Luckily, the treatment for pleurisy is easy, Ibuprofen as an
anti-inflammatory. By the way, think twice before accepting a
codeine-based pain killer and/or anti-inflammatory, such as vicodine.
It will take weeks to get this out of your body, and it will impact
your training for a while. Only go this route once you are aware of
the consequences and are able to make the trade-offs.

Once thing about pleurisy is that a proper recovery is critical. An
improper recovery implies, risk of chronic damage to the lungs's
lining, having a bad lung for the rest of your life and possibly even
impacting the heart muscle. Some light exercise is actually okay, such
as long walks or very slow rides, as long as you do not force the
lungs and never ever feel breathless. That means keeping your heart
rate in Zone-1 or Zone-2 in order to avoid higher respiration rates.
Pain will slowly ease out and eventually you'll be able to breath in
normally.

I am still concerned that I will never know why this happened, given
the "viral" tag the hospital gave to the diagnosis. Is the root cause
really viral, or could it be exercise induced? How does training, if
in any way, affect the inflammation? Do flights, especially long-haul,
have an impact? It's hard to tell. All I know is that for the next
week or so I will not be training.
