---
layout: post
published: true
category : Sports
author: Bruno Fernandez-Ruiz
title: The Challenging Case of Training at Threshold
---

Our ability to be fast in racing, whether it is cycling or running, is
limited by an almost magic upper ceiling. Right below this ceiling, we
are able to push ourselves for a long time at a comfortable heart
rate, as the body is able to bring fuel to the muscles and recycle
toxins. But push above this ceiling, and things quickly fall apart.
This limit is our lactate threshold, and although it is mainly
determined by genetic factors and it can only be determined exactly in
the lab, it is possible to train the body to raise this threshold.
Training for threshold will allow sustaining more power for longer
periods of time, and at a slightly higher heart rate that will then
feel more comfortable.

Theoretically, threshold training requires riding at the race pace we
can sustain for an hour. If we go harder than this, we will quickly
slow down. If we go slower, we will not be pushing the ceiling up.
Training threshold is taxing and the body will usually take up to 48
hours to recover from this session, so although this is not something
we want to be doing on consecutive days, we can repeat it quite often
and see the training benefits. Let's also remember that in a
well-balanced pro-style training plan, there is space for long
endurance miles, some hard SPRINTervals, jumps/pulls, anaerobic
intervals, and, critically, structured threshold work.

The standard threshold training specifies holding a steady TT effort
for 20 to 30 minutes at the max power or heart rate we can sustain for
that period (well, in theory the duration is 60 mins, but only pro or
elite level riders can realistically achieve that). There are variants
to the steady session, for example over-unders, where you train a few
mins slightly higher than threshold and then a few mins slightly
lower, to train the body to recover quicker from power surges. As an
anecdotal side note, in my endurance, tempo and VO2Max training
sessions I guide myself with power, whereas for threshold training I
prefer using heart rate. Now, I am not a coach, so please do not read
too much into this.

Which brings us to training threshold on Zwift. There are a few
options in the workouts module that we could use for this purpose. Or
we could go up the EPIC KOM in Watopia. And although I have done these
things myself quite a few times, I struggled repeating it week in and
week out, so I would skip threshold training. I really prefer to
suffer in company, sharing the pain can be a huge motivation.

Races on Zwift can be a good way to train for threshold, but only if
you are disciplined. Unfortunately, most races on Zwift are relatively
short and have huge power surges at VO2Max for a few mins, so you are
either way over threshold or way under. There are exceptions to this
though like the longer Asia 100 or KISS 100 races.

So since we tend to avoid threshold training individually, could we
design a group ride on Zwift that would motivate us to train at
threshold more? I think we do! The only issue is that our threshold
levels in a group can be very different, so unless we handicap
everybody's threshold power, the group ride would quickly break.

This is why we created the WBR TT Threshold Training Challenge: this
is a handicapped event, you change your bike, your weight and your
height so that all riders are equally leveled for power and
aerodynamics. The ride is a 40km TT, and since we level rider's FTP to
4.0 w/kg, it should last about 60 minutes. Most of us won't be able to
hold threshold power for 60 minutes anyway, more like 20 to 30 mins.
So depending on your existing level of fitness, you can play with how
long you stay at threshold power (or heart rate). For example, you
could do two blocks of 20min with 10 mins of high tempo in between, or
one block of 30 mins, etc. You can also do some quick surges for a
couple of minutes at VO2Max, and then slightly under threshold, i.e.
Over-Unders, which will help you train your body to recover during
attacks in races.

This WBR ride is happening right now on Tuesday and Friday mornings
UTC, with alternate flat vs hilly courses. Usually all riders end up
within 2 minutes of each other, and right about 4.0 w/kg average. A
small variance is normal, since we are all subject to changes in
stress, sleep, etc. and our stamina is also a key factor in these
sessions. Messaging inside the event is not only possible but highly
encouraged, and there is also obviously a competitive edge to doing a
40km TT.
