Beta Test Program Participation Agreement

PLEASE READ THIS ENTIRE BETA TEST PROGRAM PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT
(THIS “AGREEMENT”) AND INDICATE WHETHER YOU AGREE TO ITS TERMS BY
EITHER: (A) ACCESSING OR DOWNLOADING ANY OF THE BETA MATERIALS; OR (B)
BY CLICKING THE “ACCEPT” BUTTON. THIS AGREEMENT IS BETWEEN YOU AND
ZWIFT, LLC (“ZWIFT”) AND CAN BE ACCEPTED ONLY BY AN ADULT 18 YEARS OR
OLDER (IF YOU ARE YOUNGER THAN 18, YOUR PARENT OR GUARDIAN MUST ACCEPT
THIS AGREEMENT ON YOUR BEHALF). YOUR ACCESS OR DOWNLOAD OF ANY BETA
MATERIALS MEANS THAT YOU HAVE ACCEPTED THE TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT.

Beta Materials and Program Zwift will provide you with access to the
Zwift beta testing software product, service, website and related
materials (“Beta Materials”) that is required for participation in the
Zwift beta test program (“Program”). Program participation is subject
to this Agreement’s terms and will require you to have access to the
internet and certain hardware and equipment that are not provided to
you by Zwift. The Program is intended only for those who are 13 years
or older.

Participant Feedback. Zwift or its authorized third parties may obtain
information from you regarding the use of the Beta Materials or your
participation in the Program. Notwithstanding any selections you may
have made previously to decline to receive information from Zwift or
to be contacted by Zwift, Zwift may contact you to solicit information
on your use of Beta Materials. You agree to provide information to
Zwift regarding your experiences using Beta Materials. Your desired
responses may include responding to surveys or reporting bug problems.
Information you provide to Zwift in connection with the Program,
including ideas or inventions collected by Zwift is referred to as
“Feedback.” You agree that Feedback: (a) contains your original ideas
or invention and is provided by you to Zwift without payment or
conditions; (b) once conveyed to Zwift, becomes the property and
confidential information of Zwift; (c) may be used or distributed by
Zwift for any purpose in connection with Beta Materials or development
of any other product or services, including disclosure of such
information to third parties; and (d) permits Zwift to collect and use
your personal information in connection with the Program, provided
that Zwift does not distribute that information to non-affiliated
third parties without your permission or as otherwise stated in the
applicable privacy policy. Ownership of the Program and Beta
Materials. Zwift exclusively owns the Program, the Beta Materials and
the intellectual property rights associated with them. You may not
copy, distribute, sell, license, loan, or transfer the Beta Materials.
Sharing Beta Materials and Program Experience. We welcome you to share
in game snapshots and your experiences in social media provided you
attribute all posts @GoZwift with #zwiftbeta. Additionally, we’d love
to hear your feedback in our forums. Our developers are regularly
reading and responding to posts, and it's a great way to get involved
with the rest of the beta community and organize group rides.

You can also follow us on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, or join our
Strava group to take the Zwift experience with you wherever you go! No
matter how you choose to participate, we look forward to seeing you on
the road. Participant’s Representations. You warrant and represent
that you: (a) have no physical condition, such as epilepsy or history
of photosensitivity, that would be aggravated or triggered by playing
video games or other interactive entertainment software products; (b)
knowingly agree to assume the risk that any latent physical defects
you may have could be aggravated by participation in this Program; (c)
will conduct yourself responsibly in regards to participation in the
Program and treatment of the Beta Materials and Feedback, following a
reasonable, common-sense code of conduct; (d) will not in any way
cause harm to Zwift, its affiliates or partners or sponsors; (e) agree
that if you allow anyone else to use the Beta Materials, you accept
responsibility for their acts, including any violations of this
Agreement; (f) will not misappropriate any of the intellectual
property of Zwift or any other party; and (g) will not reverse
engineer, decompile or disassemble the Beta Materials or engage in the
unauthorized transfer, exhibition, export, import or transmission of
programs and will not use any devices to circumvent any authentication
schemes. Acknowledgment of Data Collection. Some Beta Materials may
contain a software program that allows the retrieval of information
about a user’s hardware and software for authentication, copy
protection, system, product management and administration and other
purposes. The information collected does not identify the user
personally. No Guarantee of Server Uptime/Disclaimer. Zwift does not
guarantee the continuous operation of the servers used in connection
with the Program. Zwift is not liable for your inability to use the
Beta Materials or delay or failure of the servers to perform. NO
WARRANTIES AND REPRESENTATIONS. THE BETA MATERIALS, THE PROGRAM, AND
ANY SOFTWARE OR HARDWARE PROVIDED BY ZWIFT ARE PROVIDED “AS IS” AND,
TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PROVIDED UNDER LAW, ZWIFT DISCLAIMS ALL
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, WHETHER EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY AND
REMEDIES. In no event will Zwift be liable hereunder for any damages
whatsoever, including direct, special or incidental damages, relating
to your participation in the Program, and your exclusive remedy is to
cease use of the Beta Materials and terminate your participation in
the Program. The foregoing limitations, exclusions and disclaimers
apply to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, even if any
remedy fails of its essential purpose. Termination. Zwift reserves the
right to establish a fixed time period for the Program or otherwise
terminate your participation in the Program at any time for any
reason. Governing Law. The laws of the State of California shall
govern the terms of this Agreement and your participation in the
Program.

Any Further Questions? If you have any questions regarding the Program
or the Beta Materials, please feel free to contact us at
support@zwift.com and we will be glad to try and answer them.
